TCP / UDP Scanning
We’ll begin our exploration
of port scanning with a simple
TCP and UDP port scan using Netcat.
It should be noted that
Netcat is not a port scanner,
but it can be used as such
in a rudimetary way.
Since it’s already present on many systems,
we can repurpose some of its functionality
to mimic a basic port scan
when we are not in a need of
a fully-featured port scanner.
However, there are far better tools
dedicated to port scanning
that we will explore in detail as well.
TCP Scanning
The simplest TCP port scanning technique,
usually called CONNECT scanning,
relies on the three-way
TCP handshake mechanism.
In basic terms, a host sends
a TCP SYN packet
to a server on a destination port.
If the destination port is open,
the server responds with a SYN-ACK packet
and the client host
sends an ACK packet
to complete the handshake.
If the handshake completes successfully,
the port is considered open.
Let’s launch wireshark
so we can inspect our traffic.
We’ll set a capture filter so we only
collect the traffic we’re interested in.
Now let’s run a TCP Netcat port
scan on ports 3388-3390.
The -w option specifies the connection timeout in seconds
and -z is used to specify zero-I/O mode, which will send no data and is used for scanning:
which will send no data
and is used for scanning:
Based on this output,
we can see that port 3389 is open
while connections on ports 3388
and 3390 timed out.
Let’s return to wireshark
and inspect our capture.
In this capture,
Netcat sent several TCP SYN packets
to ports 3390, 3389, and 3388
on lines 1, 3, and 7 respectively.
Due to a variety of factors,
including timing issues,
the packets may appear
out of order in Wireshark.
Notice that the server sent a
TCP SYN-ACK packet
from port 3389 on line 4,
indicating that the port is open.
The other ports did not reply
with a similar SYN-ACK packet,
so we can infer that they are not open.
Finaly, on line 6,
Netcat closed down this connection
by sending a FIN-ACK packet.
UDP Scanning
Since UDP is stateless and does not
involve a three-way handshake,
the mechanism behind UDP port scanning
is different from TCP.
Let’s run a UDP Netcat port scan
against ports 160-162
on a different target.
This is done using the only
netcat option we have not seen yet,
-u, which indicates a UDP scan.
From the Wireshark capture,
we can see that the UDP scan uses
a different mechanism than a TCP scan:
An empty UDP datagram
was sent to specific ports
in datagrams 1, 3, 4, and 5.
If the destination UDP port is open,
the datagram will be passed
to the application layer
and the response received
will depend on how the application is programmed to respond.
In this example,
the application sends no response.
However, if the destination UDP port is closed,
the target should respond with an ICMP port unreachable
(as seen in datagrams 2 and 6),
that is sent by the IP
stack of the target machine.
Most UDP scanners tend to use the
standard “ICMP port unreachable” message
to infer the status of a target port.
However, this method
can be completely unreliable
when the target port
is filtered by a firewall.
In fact, in these cases the scanner
will report the target port as open
because of the absence
of the ICMP message.
We'll see later how dedicated
scanners resolve this issue.